Hi and welcome back.
In this video, we're talking about creating
our own errors in Python.
Let's go over to our errors project,
and I'm going to create a new file.
I'm gonna call this errors.py.
And now we have ourselves a blank file.
We've looked at how we can raise errors,
but we've only used the built-in errors.
Let's for example raise TypeError.
We've got this type, and we've written a new object of it,
and that's what we raise.
Now, we know how to create a class
that extends everything from another class,
essentially a copy.
How do we create a class
that is essentially a copy of another class?
By using inheritance.
If we had to create a custom error
so that we can do MyCustomError.
Remember this is a class,
and it has to inherit from
one of the built-in errors.
You can pick any you want, for example, TypeError.
Go ahead and pause the video and try to create a class
that would inherit from a TypeError.
How you may go about that?
It's fairly straight-forward,
it'll just be a couple of lines.
Okay, I hope you managed that.
Very straight-forward, but it can be a bit confusing
when you encounter that you have to do something
in a new scenario that you hadn't thought of before.
Creating a class that extends a TypeError
is just like creating a class that extends any other class.
Class MyCustomError, TypeError.
And then of course we need the indented block,
but we can type pass to just pass through
and not do anything.
Now we can raise MyCustomError
because it essentially is a TypeError,
it's just got a new name now.
So we can raise it, let's right-click errors.py and run it.
By the way, if you start getting accustomed
to pressing the Play button up here on the right,
that's fine, but make sure to check what you are running,
which is this thing here, and right now you're running app,
so if you press Play, you're gonna run app.py not errors.py,
so you may want to run errors.
Now notice how you get your MyCustomError thing here,
but it doesn't have a message or anything like that,
and what you then get is __main__.MyCustomError.
Don't worry too much about the main part,
we're going to look into exactly what it means
in the next section,
but just know that you've managed to now raise an error
which is called MyCustomError,
and of course you can put in here
some message, this is a pretty terrible message,
but you know you can.
Now we've made this edit,
and I'd also like to intersperse
into here some PyCharm goodness.
Now our run file has changed to errors.py,
so we can press the Play button up here on the right
or we can press the Play button down here on the left.
And that's fine.
That's gonna re-run that file.
And now you can see that you get a nice description
beside your name of the error.
This is how you can create your custom errors.
Now, of course you can
have a custom error that takes in some more data
other than just a message,
and this is part of the power of these custom errors.
For example, say you want your custom error
to include an error code.
These things are fairly popular,
for example if you've ever got a printer,
you'll know that they give you error codes
all over the place and sometimes it can be useful
to have error codes in your messages.
Now an option is of course to have something
like "Error code 500, OUCH! An error happened.",
but you don't know that this error code is 500
from a programme point of view,
because of course this is a string,
it's just some letters and numbers and symbols
and Python can't interpret it.
If you then wanted to check
whether your error has a code 500 or not,
it would not be so easy.
So instead, the best thing to do is to have two arguments:
the message, and then the code, for example, 500.
But in order to do that,
we have to define a new constructor in MyCustomError,
so let's do that.
And what we want to do is call the super class constructor
with, oh sorry, message, code,
call the super class constructor
with the message as an argument.
Call the super class __init__ method
with the message as an argument,
and then set the code to be a property
of MyCustomError's object.
So pause the video and give that a go.
I hope you managed.
In order to call the __init__ method of the super class,
all we do is __init__ message.
So now we are passing the message parameter
to the __init__ method of the super class
which is TypeError,
and we can also do self.code
= code like that.
You okay?
Now we have this here and we can play the errors file again,
but notice how we don't get any extra information
in the message.
We've got "OUCH! An error happened.",
and we don't know that it's an error code 500,
all we've got is this 500 code on the line
where we actually raise the error,
because this is the line where we raise the error
and we've typed 500 in there.
So what can we do?
Well, we could put the error code in here again.
But of course that's not great
because if you then go and change this one, you say 400,
then you also have to go here and change the string.
So not fantastic.
We don't want to do that.
What can we do instead in order to include this error code
inside the message?
I hope you managed that,
all you have to do is, when I show you,
if you didn't quite manage it's fairly obvious,
but of course you have to think in this way.
You just want to create a new string
that says "Error code : ".
That's it.
We're just creating a new string which will now replace
the message we got in by this other string
that contains the error code as well.
And in order to begin thinking this way, that takes time,
that you can essentially do anything you want.
All that's happening in these method calls,
calling the __init__ method
and raising and things like that,
data is moving from one place to another.
You've got this string,
and that string is now being assigned to message.
Then that message was gonna go over to this __init__ method,
where it was gonna be assigned to something else.
Someplace in Python's code that message was gonna be used
in order to print it out to the console.
But that is just a string.
If you can put a string in there,
you can put any string value you want,
which means you can modify it here
and just pass in slightly different data.
That's totally fine, not a problem there at all,
all we're doing is modifying some data,
passing it over to the next level, which is the TypeError.
And at any level of our programme, at any line we want,
we can change the data that we're passing around,
and that's really what programming's all about
is passing data, passing messages from one place to another.
Anyway, now that we've looked
at how to create your own custom errors,
I also wanted to give you some more Python goodness,
which is the docstring.
We've not looked at docstrings yet,
but, well, I'm about to tell you about them.
Under the class and not inside the __init__ method,
you can type a multi-line string,
and if you remember correctly the multi-line strings
are those that have three quotation marks at the start
and three at the end.
This is a multi-line string,
which means you can, for example,
down here print a multi-line string
that says, "Hello How are you?",
like so.
And of course you cannot do that
because you have raised an error there,
but this is fine, you know?
You can run this here and what you get is a bunch of lines
there with the indentation and everything else.
If you do that, now you get two lines.
Of course, this is new line here,
so you may want to do this instead.
Now you get them all in a single line.
This is a multi-line string,
and multi-line string are pretty useful
when you have a really long string
that you want to print out or otherwise use,
but also when you have a multi-line string
directly underneath a class or directly underneath a method
or a function you can actually type some stuff here
that will be a docstring.
That's some information about what the class does,
or where it's used, or why it's used,
so that other Python developers can look at it
and understand what it does,
and also it becomes a part of your code,
and I'll show you exactly what that means in just a moment.
So let's say we wanted to tell
other developers that MyCustomError,
"Exception raised when a specific error code is needed.",
because this has a code here.
And then we're gonna rename MyCustomError
to RuntimeErrorWithCode,
for example.
Not a very good name, but, you know.
So now what we can do
is we can, whenever we're looking at this code,
we'll quickly see, okay, this is an exception
that's raised when a specific error code is needed.
That's cool.
And that helps us understand exactly what this is for.
If you were to create an object of this type,
without raising it, just for the sake of example,
you can do print
err.__doc__,
of course we're gonna
give it the arguments that it needs.
So we can print the variable name,
which is your object, .__doc__,
and that is going to give you
the docstring that you wrote there.
This is particularly useful when you are developing
and you wanna look at what something is defined to be.
Maybe not so useful when you're writing a programme,
but nonetheless it's interesting
that Python sees this thing here, which is just a string,
as something that has particular meaning.
And using docstrings, for example in functions,
particularly complex functions and in classes
to explain what they do,
and you can also use them
at the very top of your file as a module definition,
or what this file is all about.
You can do that as well, you can put a docstring up here.
There are many tools that will read those docstrings
and create a nice page explaining
sort of what your classes do and what your methods do
and this is for creating documentation,
and it can be pretty useful,
and that's really how the docstring came to be,
it was people wanting to add some descriptions
on what their classes and their methods do.
So feel free to do that, particularly if you create
any slightly more complex functions,
as we'll see in the following sections,
we're gonna be actually merging all our Python knowledge
together and creating some nicer project.
You can use docstrings in those cases just to explain
what exactly these things are for when you come back
to them weeks down the line,
or when you're working with someone else
and you want them to be able to understand
exactly what happened more easily.
Okay?
And of course, you can have your docstring,
just as an aside,
you can have your docstring in a single line.
This is a single-line multi-line docstring.
This is also fine, in case you wanna save space.
You can have the docstring in here,
but the docstring must have
these triple double quotation marks.
So these three.
And that's just a convention for docstrings, okay?
All right, that's it for this video.
We talked about how to create our own errors
by extending from a particular error,
and if you don't want to extend from TypeError
because your error is just not a TypeError,
for example, you can just extend from Exception,
sorry, not Error.
You can extend from Exception,
which is sort of the most base exception class
that you should inherit from.
Don't extend from BaseException, that's not for us to use,
just extend from Exception.
And that's fine.
Okay.
That's it for this video, again,
and I'll see you on the very next one.